Ideas on Motion in Ancient Indian Science


Ancient Indian thinkers had arrived at an elaborate system of ideas on motion. Force. the cause of
motion. was thought to be of diﬁerent kinds : force due to continuous pressure [nodan]. as the force
of wind on a sailing vessel; impact [abhighat). as when a potter's rod strikes the wheel: persistent
tendency [sanskara] to move in a straight line(vega) or restoration of shape in an elastic body:
transmitted force by a string. rod. etc. The notion of (vega) in the Vaisesika theory of motion perhaps
comes closest to the concept of inertia. Vega. the tendency to move in a straight line. was thought to
be opposed by contact with objects including atmosphere. a parallel to the ideas of friction and air
resistance. It was correctly summarised that the different kinds of motion (translational. rotational
and vibrational) of an extended body arise from only the translational motion of its constituent
particles. A falling leaf in the wind may have downward motion as a whole [patan) and also rotational
and vibrational motion [bhraman. spandan). but each particle of the leaf at an instant only has a
deﬁnite (small) displacement. There was considerable focus in Indian thought on measurement of
motion and units of length and time. It was known that the position of a particle in space can be
indicated by distance measured along three axes. Bhaskara [1150 AD.) had introduced the concept
of ‘instantaneous motion' [tatkaliki gati']. which anticipated the modem notion of instantaneous
velocity using Differential Calculus. The difference between a wave and a current (of water) was clearly
understood: a current is a motion of particles of water under gravity and ﬂuidity while a wave results

no net force acting on the body. It is incorrect to
assume that a net force is needed to keep a body
in uniform motion. To maintain a body in
uniform motion, we need to apply an external
force to ecounter the frictional force, so that
the two forces sum up to zero net external
force.

To summarise, if the net external force is zero,
a body at rest continues to remain at rest and a
body in motion continues to move with a uniform
velocity. This property of the body is called
inertia. Inertia means ‘resistance to change’.
A body does not change its state of rest or
uniform motion, unless an external force
compels it to change that state.
