The property of inertia contained in the First
law is evident in many situations. Suppose we
are standing in a stationary bus and the driver
starts the bus suddenly. We get thrown
backward with a jerk. Why ? Our feet are in touch
with the ﬂoor. If there were no friction, we would
remain where we were, while the ﬂoor of the bus
would simply slip forward under our feet and the
back of the bus would hit us. However,
fortunately, there is some friction between the
feet and the ﬂoor. If the start is not too sudden,
i.e. if the acceleration is moderate, the frictional
force would be enough to accelerate our feet
along with the bus. But our body is not strictly
a rigid body. It is deformable, i.e. it allows some
relative displacement between different parts.
What this means is that while our feet go with
the bus, the rest of the body remains where it is
due to inertia. Relative to the bus, therefore, we
are thrown backward. As soon as that happens,
however, the muscular forces on the rest of the
body (by the feet) come into play to move the body
along with the bus. A similar thing happens
when the bus suddenly stops. Our feet stop due
to the friction which does not allow relative
motion between the feet and the ﬂoor of the bus.
But the rest of the body continues to move
forward due to inertia. We are thrown forward.
The restoring muscular forces again come into
play and bring the body to rest.

 

’ Example 5.1 An astronaut accidentally
gets separated out of his small spaceship
accelerating in inter stellar space at a
constant rate of 100 m 5’2. What is the
acceleration of the astronaut the instant after

he is outside the spaceship ? (Assume that
there are no nearby stars to exert
gravitational force on him.)

 

Answer Since there are no nearby stars to exert
gravitational force on him and the small
spaceship exerts negligible gravitational
attraction on him, the net force acting on the
astronaut, once he is out of the spaceship, is
zero. By the first law of motion the acceleration
of the astronaut is zero. 4

