An experiment on head-on collision

In performing an experiment on collision on a horizontal surface, we face three difﬁculties.
One, there will be friction and bodies will not travel with uniform velocities. Two, if two bodies
of different sizes collide on a table, it would be difficult to arrange them for a head-on collision
unless their centres of mass are at the same height above the surface. Three, it will be fairly
difﬁcult to measure velocities of the two bodies just before and just after collision.

By performing this experiment in a vertical direction, all the three difficulties vanish. Take
two balls, one of which is heavier (basketball / football / volleyball) and the other lighter (tennis
ball / rubber ball / table tennis ball). First take only the heavier ball and drop it vertically from
some height, say 1 m. Note to which it rises. This gives the velocities near the ﬂoor or ground,

just before and just after the bounce (by using 1)2 = 2 gh ). Hence you
will get the coefficient of restitution.

Now take the big ball and a small ball and hold them in your W
hands one over the other, with the heavier ball below the lighter
one, as shown here. Drop them together, taking care that they remain
together while falling, and see what happens. You will find that the
heavier ball rises less than when it was dropped alone, while the

lighter one shoots up to about 3 m. With practice, you will be able to
hold the ball properly so that the lighter ball rises vertically up and I
does not ﬂy sideways. This is head-on collision.

You can try to find the best combination of balls which gives you ,
the best effect. You can measure the masses on a standard balance.
We leave it to you to think how you can determine the initial and l
final velocities of the balls.


which is a positive quantity as expected. and ”2f _ m1 + m2 (6.28)
Consider next an elastic collision. Using the Thus, the ‘unknowns’ {01f v21} are obtained in above nomenclature With 91 = 92 = 0, the terms of the ‘knowns’ {m1, m2, vu}. Special cases momentum and kinetic energy conservation of our analysis are interesting.
