More often, however, we do not know all the
forces to begin with. In that case, if we know
that an object is unaccelerated (i.e. it is either
at rest or in uniform linear motion), we can infer
from the ﬁrst law that the net external force on
the object must be zero. Gravity is everywhere.
For terrestrial phenomena, in particular, every
object experiences gravitational force due to the
earth. Also objects in motion generally experience
friction, viscous drag, etc. If then, on earth, an
object is at rest or in uniform linear motion, it is
not because there are no forces acting on it, but
because the various external forces cancel out
i.e. add up to zero net external force.

Consider a book at rest on a horizontal surface
Fig. (5.2(a)). It is subject to two external forces :
the force due to gravity (i.e. its weight W) acting
downward and the upward force on the book by
the table, the normal force R . Ris a self-adjusting
force. This is an example of the kind of situation
mentioned above. The forces are not quite known
fully but the state of motion is known. We observe
the book to be at rest. Therefore, we conclude
from the first law that the magnitude of R equals
that of W. A statement often encountered is :
“Since W= R, forces cancel and, therefore, the book
is at rest”. This is incorrect reasoning. The correct
statement is : “Since the book is observed to be at
rest, the net external force on it must be zero,
according to the ﬁrst law. This implies that the
normal force R must be equal and opposite to the
weight W


Consider the motion of a car starting from
rest, picking up speed and then moving on a
smooth straight road with uniform speed (Fig.
(5.2(b)). When the car is stationary, there is no
net force acting on it. During pick-up, it
accelerates. This must happen due to a net
external force. Note, it has to be an external force.
The acceleration of the car cannot be accounted
for by any internal force. This might sound
surprising, but it is true. The only conceivable
external force along the road is the force of
friction. It is the frictional force that accelerates
the car as a whole. (You will learn about friction
in section 5.9). When the car moves with
constant velocity, there is no net external force.