b Example 5.5 Two identical billiard balls
strike a rigid wall with the same speed but
at different angles. and get reﬂected without
any change in speed. as shown in Fig. 5.6.
What is (i) the direction of the force on the
wall due to each ball? (ii) the ratio of the
magnitudes of impulses imparted to the
balls by the wall ’?

 

(*0 (b)

Fig. 5.6

Answer An instinctive answer to (i) might be
that the force on the wall in case (a) is normal to
the wall, while that in case (b) is inclined at 30°
to the normal. This answer is wrong. The force
on the wall is normal to the wall in both cases.

How to find the force on the wall? The trick is
to consider the force (or impulse) on the ball
due to the wall using the second law, and then
use the third law to answer (i). Let u be the speed
of each ball before and after collision with the
wall, and m the mass of each ball. Choose the x
and y axes as shown in the ﬁgure, and consider
the change in momentum of the ball in each
case :

Case (a)

(px )Inltial = mu (pg )lnltlal = 0

(pX)ﬁna1=_mu (py)ﬁml =0

Impulse is the change in momentum vector.
Therefore,

x—component of impulse = — 2 m u

y-component of impulse = O
Impulse and force are in the same direction.
Clearly, from above, the force on the ball due to
the wall is normal to the wall, along the negative
x-direction. Using Newton’s third law of motion,
the force on the wall due to the ball is normal to
the wall along the positive x-direction. The
magnitude of force cannot be ascertained since
the small time taken for the collision has not
been specified in the problem.

Case (b)
(px)initial = mucos 30° , (Py)mm = — Tl'lLl.Sll’1-30o
(px)_/inal = —mucos30°, (py)ﬁm,, = — musin30°

Note, while px changes sign after collision, py
does not. Therefore,

x—component of impulse = —2 m u cos 30°
y-component of impulse = O

The direction of impulse (and force) is the same
as in (a) and is normal to the wall along the
negative x direction. As before, using Newton’s
third law, the force on the wall due to the ball is
normal to the wall along the positive x direction.

The ratio of the magnitudes of the impulses
imparted to the balls in (a) and (b) is

2mu/(2mucos30°)=l~l.2 ‘

